Create README for custom transactions - Closes #3164 (#3735)
LiskHQ/lisk-sdk: elements/lisk-transactions/README.md

@liskhq/lisk-transactions is containing everything related to transactions according to the Lisk protocol

## Introduction

Transactions are the essential part of the blockchain applications created using Lisk SDK.

> The Lisk SDK provides a base transaction from which developers can inherit and extend from,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Lisk SDK provides a class [BaseTransaction](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-sdk/blob/development/elements/lisk-transactions/src/base_transaction.ts) from which developers can inherit and extend from, to create __custom transaction types__.```

> in which the application-specific business logic can be defined according to an abstract interface that is common across all transaction types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The application-specific business logic for custom transaction types is defined according to an abstract [interface](#interface) that is common across all transaction types.
```

> All of the default for Lisk SDK transactions are implementing the abstract interface of base transaction, therefore can be used as a role model for the custom transactions. All of them implement a different use-case of the Lisk network, i.e:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All of the default transaction types of the Lisk SDK transactions implement the abstract interface of the base transaction, and therefore can be used as a role model for custom transactions.
It's also possible to inherit from one of the default transaction types, in order to extent or modify them.

The default transaction types each implement a different use-case of the Lisk network, i.e:
```

0. Balance transfer (type 0),
1. Second signature registration (type 1)
1. Delegate registration (type 2)
1. Delegate vote (type 3)
1. Multisignature account registration (type 4)

> First 10 transaction types are reserved for the Lisk protocol, don't use them to register custom transactions.

Reviewer 2: Is it okay to already specify first `10`?

> First 10 transaction types are reserved for the Lisk protocol, don't use them to register custom transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> The first 10 transaction types are reserved for the [Lisk protocol](https://lisk.io/documentation/lisk-protocol), don't use them to register custom transactions.

For a complete list of all default transaction types, check out the section [Lisk Transactions](https://lisk.io/documentation/lisk-protocol/transactions) of the Lisk Protocol.

Check out the Lisk SDK [Example Apps](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-sdk-test-app) for simple [code examples of custom transaction types](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-sdk-test-app/blob/development/hello_world/hello_transaction.js).
```

### Lifecycle

The lifecycle of a transaction in general in Lisk SDK can be summarized as follows:

1. A transaction is created and signed (off-chain). The script to do it is in `src/create_and_sign.ts`.

> 2. The transaction is sent to a network. This can be done by a third party tool (like `curl` or `Postman`), but also using Lisk Commander, Lisk Hub or Mobile. All of the tools need to be authorized to access an HTTP API of a network node.

Reviewer 2: Im not sure if Lisk Hub or Mobile can sent a custom transaction

Author: Default ones they can though, but I will remove it from here.

> 3. A network node receives a transaction and after a lightweight schema, verification adds it to a transaction pool.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. A network node receives a transaction and after a lightweight schema validation, adds it to a transaction pool.
```

> 4. In TransactionPool the transaction gets `validated`, also `validatedAgainstOtherTransactions` of the same type.

Reviewer 3: `validatedAgainstOtherTransactions ` step can be omitted for now.

> 4. In TransactionPool the transaction gets `validated`, also `validatedAgainstOtherTransactions` of the same type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. In the transaction pool, the transactions are added to the `received` queue, further processing of transactions is performed in various jobs in the transaction pool.
```

> 5. Valid transactions go to the `prepare` step of the StateStore, which to limit the I/O database operations prepares all the information relevant to properly `validate`, `apply` or `undo` the transaction. The store with the prepared data is a parameter of the mentioned methods.

Reviewer 3: 4b. Firstly, transactions are validated against the transaction type. On this step, only static checks are performed. These include schema validation and signature validation.

> 5. Valid transactions go to the `prepare` step of the StateStore, which to limit the I/O database operations prepares all the information relevant to properly `validate`, `apply` or `undo` the transaction. The store with the prepared data is a parameter of the mentioned methods.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
5. Validated transactions go to the `prepare` step of the StateStore, which to limit the I/O database operations prepares all the information relevant to properly `apply` or `undo` the transaction. The store with the prepared data is a parameter of the mentioned methods.
```

6. Delegates are forging the valid transactions into the blocks and broadcasting the blocks to the network. Each network node performs the `apply` and `applyAsset` steps after the successful `validate` step.
7. It is probable, especially shortly after a block is applied, that due to the decentralized network conditions a node does the `undo` step and the block containing all of the included transactions get reverted in favour of a competing block.

> While implementing a custom transaction, it is necessary to implement some of the mentioned steps. For most of them, a base transaction implements a default behaviour. As you feel more confident in using Lisk SDK, it is more likely for developers to override most of the base transaction methods, so the implementation is well-tailored and implemented with the best possible performance to the application's use case.

Reviewer 2: maybe it's good to mention that we are planning to reduce the required functions?

Author: Added the mini disclaimer.

##### applyAsset

> applyAsset(store: StateStore): ReadonlyArray<TransactionError>

The business use-case of a transaction is implemented in `applyAsset` method. Apply all of the necessary changes from the received transaction to the affected account(s) by calling `store.set`. Call `store.get` to get all of the relevant data. The transaction that you're currently processing is the function's context (like `this.amount`).
Invalidate the transaction by pushing an error into the result array.

##### undoAsset

> undoAsset(store: StateStore): ReadonlyArray<TransactionError>

The invert of `applyAsset`. Roll-back all of the changes to the accounts done in the `applyAsset` step.

##### validateAsset

> validateAsset(): ReadonlyArray<TransactionError>

Before a transaction reaches the apply step it gets validated. Check the transaction's asset correctness from the schema perspective (no access to StateStore here).
Invalidate the transaction by pushing an error into the result array.

##### prepare

> prepare(store: StateStorePrepare): Promise<void>

Prepare the relevant information about the accounts, which will be accessible in the later steps during the `apply` and `undo` steps.

> #### Performance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Optional
```

Author: Changed the title to "additonal methods"

> To increase your application's performance, you should override the following functions: `verifyAgainstTransactions`, `assetFromSync`, `fromSync`.

Reviewer 2: `assetFromSync`, `fromSync` these are not for performance. (it's more for legacy sync format)

Author: Changed the title to "additional methods"

@liskhq/lisk-transactions is containing everything related to transactions according to the Lisk protocol

## Introduction

Transactions are the essential part of the blockchain applications created using Lisk SDK.

The Lisk SDK provides a class [BaseTransaction](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-sdk/blob/development/elements/lisk-transactions/src/base_transaction.ts) from which developers can inherit and extend from, to create **custom transaction types**.```
The application-specific business logic for custom transaction types is defined according to an abstract [interface](#interface) that is common across all transaction types.

All of the default transaction types of the Lisk SDK transactions implement the abstract interface of the base transaction, and therefore can be used as a role model for custom transactions.
It's also possible to inherit from one of the default transaction types, in order to extent or modify them.

The default transaction types each implement a different use-case of the Lisk network, i.e:

> 0. Balance transfer (type 0),

Author: ```suggestion
0. Balance transfer (type 0)
```

Check out the Lisk SDK [Example Apps](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-sdk-test-app) for simple [code examples of custom transaction types](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-sdk-test-app/blob/development/hello_world/hello_transaction.js).

### Lifecycle

The lifecycle of a transaction in general in Lisk SDK can be summarized as follows:

1. A transaction is created and signed (off-chain). The script to do it is in `src/create_and_sign.ts`.
2. The transaction is sent to a network. This can be done by a third party tool (like `curl` or `Postman`), but also using Lisk Commander.
   To send the default transactions for the protocol network, you can rely on the wallet Lisk UI tools - Lisk Hub and Mobile. All of the tools need to be authorized to access an HTTP API of a network node.
3. A network node receives a transaction and after a lightweight schema validation, adds it to a transaction pool.
4. In the transaction pool, the transactions are firstly `validated`. In this step, only static checks are performed. These include schema validation and signature validation.

> 5. Validated transactions go to the `prepare` step defined in the transaction class, which to limit the I/O database operations prepares all the information relevant to properly `apply` or `undo` the transaction. The store with the prepared data is a parameter of the mentioned methods.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
5. `prepare` function implemented in the transaction definition is then executed for validated transactions, which loads blockchain data necessary for verifying and executing the transaction. This data is cached in memory. It is called state store which has the interface defined here: <should have a some details about the state store>
```

> 6. Delegates are forging the valid transactions into the blocks and broadcasting the blocks to the network. Each network node performs the `apply` and `applyAsset` steps after the successful `validate` step.

Reviewer 3: After prepare function, transactions are executed in memory by performing `apply` and `applyAsset` functions. These functions verify the transactions against the blockchain data and perform the effect of the transaction on the blockchain state in memory. Based on workflow executing these function
```suggestion
6. After prepare function, transactions are executed in memory by performing `apply` and `applyAsset` functions. These functions verify the transactions against the blockchain data and perform the effect of the transaction on the blockchain state in memory.
```

> 6. After prepare function, transactions are executed in memory by performing `apply` and `applyAsset` functions. These functions verify the transactions against the blockchain data and perform the effect of the transaction on the blockchain state in memory.

Author: ```suggestion
6. After prepare function, transactions are executed in memory by performing `apply` and `applyAsset` functions. These functions verify the transactions against the blockchain data and perform the effect of the transaction on the blockchain state in memory.
6a. Based on workflow executing `apply` and `applyAsset` functions, the state in memory is either saved to the blockchain or discarded. For instance, if the transaction is being executed within the process of saving new a block in the blockchain, the changes in the memory are saved in the database. In the other case, when the transaction is executed within the domain of the transaction pool, the changes of state in memory are discarded.
```

> 7. It is probable, especially shortly after a block is applied, that due to the decentralized network conditions a node does the `undo` step and the block containing all of the included transactions get reverted in favour of a competing block.

Reviewer 3: 6a.  Based on workflow executing `apply` and `applyAsset` function, the state in memory is either saved to the blockchain or discarded. For instance, if the transaction is being executed within the process of saving new a block in the blockchain, the changes in the memory are saved in the database. In the other case, when the transaction is executed within the domain of the transaction pool, the changes of state in memory are discarded.

Author: Added a paragraph 👍

While implementing a custom transaction, it is necessary to implement some of the mentioned steps. For most of them, a base transaction implements a default behaviour. As you feel more confident in using Lisk SDK, it is more likely for developers to override most of the base transaction methods, so the implementation is well-tailored and implemented with the best possible performance to the application's use case.

### Interface

Over the course of the alpha phase there will be significant changes in the Lisk protocol and implementation. We will be working towards the great developer experience while using Alpha SDK by reducing and optimizing the set of functions in custom transaction's API in the following releases. We strongly rely on the community feedback of how the interfaces can be improved.

#### Required methods

All of the abstract methods and properties on the base transaction's interface are required to implement. Those are:

##### TYPE

> > static TYPE: number

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> static get TYPE (): number
```

Author: In Typescript is `static TYPE: number`.

Reviewer: But aren't the custom transactions implemented in JS? At least they are in our examples.

Reviewer 2: but still it's not a function.
In Javascript, it's equivalent to `Transaction.TYPE = 3`

Reviewer: In JS you can also use static getters, what we do in our example apps, see:
https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-sdk-examples/blob/development/hello_world/hello_transaction.js#L8 and
https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-sdk-examples/blob/development/cashback/transactions/cashback_transaction.js#L9

Reviewer 2: i dont think there is benefit of using getter here 🤔

Reviewer: I dont either, but it's what we do in the examples ^^
And we also mention it here in section `Required methods`
In docs we changed this already and added a section for `Required properties` (see link above) - maybe that's better to understand?

Author: In ES5 you can assign a static var like `Transaction.TYPE = 3`, in ES6 you have an additional static field, but as all class properties in ES6 need to be implemented as a function, you could assign a static property as a getter function: `static get TYPE() { return 3; }`. 

I would be in favour of cutting the discussion here. We describe the interface of a TypeScript file, BaseTransaction, and we use TypeScript for that. We should describe our interfaces and leave the programming style up to individuals.

All of the default transaction types of the Lisk SDK transactions implement the abstract interface of the base transaction, and therefore can be used as a role model for custom transactions.
It's also possible to inherit from one of the default transaction types, in order to extent or modify them.

The default transaction types each implement a different use-case of the Lisk network, i.e:

0. Balance transfer (type 0),
1. Second signature registration (type 1)
1. Delegate registration (type 2)
1. Delegate vote (type 3)
1. Multisignature account registration (type 4)

> The first 10 transaction types are reserved for the [Lisk protocol](https://lisk.io/documentation/lisk-protocol), don't use them to register custom transactions.

For a complete list of all default transaction types, check out the section [Lisk Transactions](https://lisk.io/documentation/lisk-protocol/transactions) of the Lisk Protocol.

Check out the Lisk SDK [Example Apps](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-sdk-test-app) for simple [code examples of custom transaction types](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-sdk-test-app/blob/development/hello_world/hello_transaction.js).

### Lifecycle

> The lifecycle of a transaction in general in Lisk SDK can be summarized as follows:

Author: ```suggestion
The lifecycle of a transaction in Lisk SDK can be summarized as follows:
```

1. A transaction is created and signed (off-chain). The script to do it is in `src/create_and_sign.ts`.

> 2. The transaction is sent to a network. This can be done by a third party tool (like `curl` or `Postman`), but also using Lisk Commander.

Author: ```suggestion
2. The transaction is sent to a network. This can be done by a third party tool (like `curl` or `Postman`), but also using Lisk Commander (`lisk transaction:broadcast`).
```

#### Required methods

All of the abstract methods and properties on the base transaction's interface are required to implement. Those are:

##### TYPE

> static TYPE: number

The hallmark of a transaction. Override this static parameter with any number, keeping in mind that the first 10 types (0-9) are reserved for the default transactions.

##### applyAsset

> applyAsset(store: StateStore): ReadonlyArray<TransactionError>

The business use-case of a transaction is implemented in `applyAsset` method. Apply all of the necessary changes from the received transaction to the affected account(s) by calling `store.set`. Call `store.get` to get all of the relevant data. The transaction that you're currently processing is the function's context (like `this.amount`).
Invalidate the transaction by pushing an error into the result array.

##### undoAsset

> undoAsset(store: StateStore): ReadonlyArray<TransactionError>

The invert of `applyAsset`. Roll-back all of the changes to the accounts done in the `applyAsset` step.

##### validateAsset

> > validateAsset(): ReadonlyArray<TransactionError>

Reviewer 4: Maybe move this and prepare explanation before applyAsset and undoAsset since it happens first.

Author: Addressed.

Before a transaction reaches the apply step it gets validated. Check the transaction's asset correctness from the schema perspective (no access to StateStore here).
Invalidate the transaction by pushing an error into the result array.

##### prepare

> prepare(store: StateStorePrepare): Promise<void>

Prepare the relevant information about the accounts, which will be accessible in the later steps during the `apply` and `undo` steps.

#### Additional methods

> To increase your application's performance, you should override the following functions: `verifyAgainstTransactions`, `assetFromSync`, `fromSync`.

Reviewer 4: Should we add a brief explanation for verifyAgainstTransactions somewhere?

Author: I think it's best to start from good descriptions in the code itself and generate docs in an automatic way.

Author: I added the GitHub Pages and now inserted the reference to [liskhq.github.io/lisk-sdk](https://liskhq.github.io/lisk-sdk/)

Author: I added the GitHub Pages and now inserted the reference to [liskhq.github.io/lisk-sdk](https://liskhq.github.io/lisk-sdk/)

Author: I added the GitHub Pages and now inserted the reference to [liskhq.github.io/lisk-sdk](https://liskhq.github.io/lisk-sdk/)

@liskhq/lisk-transactions is containing everything related to transactions according to the Lisk protocol

## Introduction

Transactions are the essential part of the blockchain applications created using Lisk SDK.

The Lisk SDK provides a class [BaseTransaction](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-sdk/blob/development/elements/lisk-transactions/src/base_transaction.ts) from which developers can inherit and extend from, to create **custom transaction types**.```
The application-specific business logic for custom transaction types is defined according to an abstract [interface](#interface) that is common across all transaction types.

All of the default transaction types of the Lisk SDK transactions implement the abstract interface of the base transaction, and therefore can be used as a role model for custom transactions.
It's also possible to inherit from one of the default transaction types, in order to extent or modify them.

> It's also possible to inherit from one of the default transaction types, in order to extent or modify them.

Reviewer 4: Duplicate sentence

> It's also possible to inherit from one of the default transaction types, in order to extent or modify them.

Author: ```suggestion
```
